Pixel art pad - Corrected grammar (#1539)
hackclub/hackclub: workshops/pixel_art_pad/README.md

[repl_it]: https://repl.it

## Part 1: Prerequisites

It is recommended to have a basic understanding of:

- HTML
- Java

We will be using a library called processing.js which will help us in processing the graphics in a web canvas. All the functionalities of the pixel art pad will be written in java.

However, this workshop is beginner friendly and you can refer the [final code][final_code] to understand better.

## Part 2: Getting started

### Setting up Repl.it

[Repl.it](https://repl.it) is an amazing online code editor where we will be writing our code. Though repl.it is not mandatory, I strongly recommend you to use it in order to avoid installations and downloads.

To get started, Create your Repl by going to [https://repl.it/languages/html](https://repl.it/languages/html). Your coding environment will be created in a few moments.

![Setting up repl.it](https://cloud-flfptkrmk.vercel.app/0setuprepl.gif)

Once your repl is setup, you are all set to continue!

## Part 3: Setting Up The Required Files

### 1) Deleting the files which are not required

The first file that appears soon after the repl is setup is `index.html`.

> You will be able to find two other files called `style.css` and `script.js` in the files pane in the left side. Delete both the files as are not required in this workshop (You can have them if you want to use custom css or js).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will be able to find two other files called `style.css` and `script.js` in the files panel on the left side. Delete both the files as they are not required in this workshop (You can have them if you want to use custom css or js).
```

### 2) Creating the java file

We need a java file in this project. The java file will provide functionality to the web canvas. Create a file called `index.java` by pressing the new file icon on the files pane.

![Creating index.java](https://cloud-czzce7b1v.vercel.app/0creatingjava.gif)

Finally, you will be having two files called `index.html` and `index.java`.

## Part 4: Building The Pixel Art Pad

### 1) index.html

First, let us write the required HTML code for the pixel art pad. You will be having the following code in `index.html` by default :

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8">
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width">
    <title>repl.it</title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
  </head>
  <body>
    <script src="script.js"></script>
  </body>
</html>
```

Replace the text inside the title tag to the title you want. In my case, I am replacing it with 

```html 
<title>Pixel Art Pad</title>
```

If you don't use a custom CSS, remove the following line from the code  :

```html
<link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
```

> Since we are not using JavaScript, we will also remove the following line which is inside the <body> tag:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since we are not using JavaScript, we will also remove the following line which is inside the `<body>` tag:
```

```html
<script src="script.js"></script>
```
#### The canvas element

> Provide `<h1>` tag for the heading and `<h7>` tag for the sub title. The <canvas> tag is used for creating a canvas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Provide `<h1>` tag for the heading and `<h7>` tag for the sub title. The `<canvas>` tag is used for creating a canvas.
```

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8">
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width">
    <title>Pixel Art Pad</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <center>
    <h1>Pixel Pad</h1>
    <h7>project made at hack club workshop</h7>
    <br>
    <br>
    <canvas data-processing-sources="index.java"></canvas>
    </center>
    <script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/processing.js/1.6.6/processing.min.js"></script>
  </body>
</html>
```

And that's it! We have completed writing our HTML.

### 2) index.java

#### The Tile class

The `index.java` file will contain all the functionalities required for creating the graphics inside the web canvas.
In the `index.java` file, create a class called Tile with the following code :

```java
class Tile
{
  int x, y;
  color colour;
  
  boolean spread;
  
  Tile(int x, int y, int colour)
  {
    this.x = x;
    this.y = y;
    this.colour = colour;
    
    spread = false;
  }
}
```
The tile class will need two variables x and y of the type integer, a variable for color and a boolean variable.

Now, create a function called `Display()` for displaying the tiles with the following code :

```java

> void Display()

Reviewer: this function should be outside or inside the tile class, pls specify

Reviewer: oh ok nvm, i read it below the function

  { 
    fill(colour);
    
    if (!show) noStroke();
    else stroke(180);
    
    rect(x * 20, y * 20, 20, 20);
  }
```

Another important point to be noted is that the `Display()` function should be defined inside the Tile class.

#### Specifying the grid size

In order to specify the size of the grid, use the following code :

```java
Tile grid[][] = new Tile[25][25];
```

> Here, we are initializing a square grid of 25*25 tiles. You can change it according to your convenience.

Reviewer: "convenience" spelling

#### Specifying the colors in color palette

I love colors. In this workshop, we will be adding 9 colors for our color palette. You can modify or add more colors according to your convinience.

![A variety of colors](https://media.giphy.com/media/8Ry7iAVwKBQpG/giphy.gif)

Use the following code to specify the colors in the color palette :

```java
color colours[] = {
  color(165, 42, 42),
  color(255, 0, 0),
  color(255, 165, 0),
  color(255, 255, 0),
  color(0, 150, 0),
  color(0, 0, 255),
  color(255, 0, 200),
  color(100),
  color(255)
};

color selected = color(255);
boolean show = true;
```

The colors specified above are in color(R, G, B) format. You can modify them with the R, G, B properties of the color you want.

#### Function to setup the canvas

> We will be requiring to write a function for setting up the canvas. Use the below code to set up the canvas :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need to write a function for setting up the canvas. Use the below code to set up the canvas :
```

```java

void draw()
{ 
  for (int a = 0; a < grid.length; ++a)
  {
    for (int b = 0; b < grid[a].length; ++b)
      grid[b][a].Display();
  }
  
  if (show)
  {
    for (int a = 0; a < colours.length; ++a)
    {
      fill(colours[a]);
      stroke(0);
      ellipse(50, (a * 50) + 50, 30, 30);
    }
  }
  

  // Function for painting with mouse press
  if (mousePressed && mouseButton == LEFT)
  {
    for (int a = 0; a < grid.length; ++a)
    {
      for (int b = 0; b < grid[a].length; ++b)
      {
        if (mouseX >= (b * 20) && mouseX <= 20 + (b * 20) && mouseY >= (a * 20) && mouseY <= 20 + (a * 20))
        {
          if (show)
          {
            for (int c = 0; c < colours.length; ++c)
            {
              if (dist(mouseX, mouseY, 50, (c * 50) + 50) <= 30)
                return;
            }
          }
          
          grid[b][a].colour = selected;
        }
      }
    }
  }

}
void mousePressed()
{
  if (show)
  {
    for (int a = 0; a < colours.length; ++a)
    {
      if (dist(mouseX, mouseY, 50, (a * 50) + 50) <= 30)
        selected = colours[a];
    }
  }

> }

Reviewer: too big chunk of code. maybe split it into 3 parts

Reviewer: also lacks explanation

```
The above function defines the mouse action of filling the tile with the color choosen. You can customize or create new mouse actions if you want (For example, you can try using right click to erase a color on a tile).

> #### Final index.java code :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<details><summary>Your final code should look something like this:</summary>
```

      grid[a][b] = new Tile(a, b, color(100));
  }
}

void draw()
{ 
  for (int a = 0; a < grid.length; ++a)
  {
    for (int b = 0; b < grid[a].length; ++b)
      grid[b][a].Display();
  }
  
  if (show)
  {
    for (int a = 0; a < colours.length; ++a)
    {
      fill(colours[a]);
      stroke(0);
      ellipse(50, (a * 50) + 50, 30, 30);
    }
  }
  

  // Function for painting with mouse press
  if (mousePressed && mouseButton == LEFT)
  {
    for (int a = 0; a < grid.length; ++a)
    {
      for (int b = 0; b < grid[a].length; ++b)
      {
        if (mouseX >= (b * 20) && mouseX <= 20 + (b * 20) && mouseY >= (a * 20) && mouseY <= 20 + (a * 20))
        {
          if (show)
          {
            for (int c = 0; c < colours.length; ++c)
            {
              if (dist(mouseX, mouseY, 50, (c * 50) + 50) <= 30)
                return;
            }
          }
          
          grid[b][a].colour = selected;
        }
      }
    }
  }

}
void mousePressed()
{
  if (show)
  {
    for (int a = 0; a < colours.length; ++a)
    {
      if (dist(mouseX, mouseY, 50, (a * 50) + 50) <= 30)
        selected = colours[a];
    }
  }
}
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
</details>
```

    <title>repl.it</title>
    <link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
  </head>
  <body>
    <script src="script.js"></script>
  </body>
</html>
```

Replace the text inside the title tag to the title you want. In my case, I am replacing it with 

```html 
<title>Pixel Art Pad</title>
```

If you don't use a custom CSS, remove the following line from the code  :

```html
<link href="style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
```

Since we are not using JavaScript, we will also remove the following line which is inside the `<body>` tag:

```html
<script src="script.js"></script>
```
#### The canvas element
Provide `<h1>` tag for the heading and `<h7>` tag for the sub title. The `<canvas>` tag is used for creating a canvas.
The canvas tag is only a container for the art pad. We will be using processing.js along with Java to process the art inside the art pad.

#### Final index.html code:

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8">
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width">
    <title>Pixel Art Pad</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <center>
    <h1>Pixel Pad</h1>
    <h7>project made at hack club workshop</h7>

>     <br>

Reviewer: maybe we can just remove this 2 lines as they are not really required

  color(0, 150, 0),
  color(0, 0, 255),
  color(255, 0, 200),
  color(100),
  color(255)
};

color selected = color(255);
boolean show = true;
```

The colors specified above are in color(R, G, B) format. You can modify them with the R, G, B properties of the color you want.

#### Function to setup the canvas

We need to write a function for setting up the canvas. Use the below code to set up the canvas :

```java
void setup()
{
  size(500, 500);
  
  for (int a = 0; a < grid.length; ++a)
  {
    for (int b = 0; b < grid[a].length; ++b)
      grid[a][b] = new Tile(a, b, color(100));
  }
}
```

In the above code, the size of the canvas is specified inside `size(500, 500);`. You can modify it according to your need.

#### Function to draw upon mouse click

We need to create a function called draw(). This function is used to fill a tile with the seletected color.

```java
void draw()
{ 
  for (int a = 0; a < grid.length; ++a)
  {
    for (int b = 0; b < grid[a].length; ++b)
      grid[b][a].Display();
  }
  
  if (show)
  {
    for (int a = 0; a < colours.length; ++a)
    {
      fill(colours[a]);
      stroke(0);
      ellipse(50, (a * 50) + 50, 30, 30);
    }
  }
  ```
  

> After defining the draw() function, we should create an 'if' condition to check if the left mouse button is clicked. The following code checks if the left mouse button is pressed and returns the tile which is clicked :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After defining the draw() function, we will create an 'if' condition to check whether the left mouse button is clicked or not:
```

> After defining the draw() function, we should create an 'if' condition to check if the left mouse button is clicked. The following code checks if the left mouse button is pressed and returns the tile which is clicked :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After defining the `draw()` function, we should create an 'if' condition to check if the left mouse button is clicked. The following code checks if the left mouse button is pressed and returns the tile which is clicked :
```

Reviewer: use code highlighting for code related terms

```java
  if (mousePressed && mouseButton == LEFT)
  {
    for (int a = 0; a < grid.length; ++a)
    {
      for (int b = 0; b < grid[a].length; ++b)
      {
        if (mouseX >= (b * 20) && mouseX <= 20 + (b * 20) && mouseY >= (a * 20) && mouseY <= 20 + (a * 20))
        {
          if (show)
          {
            for (int c = 0; c < colours.length; ++c)
            {
              if (dist(mouseX, mouseY, 50, (c * 50) + 50) <= 30)
                return;
            }
          }
          

>           grid[b][a].colour = selected;

Reviewer: these lines aren't really explained much, so it may lead to confusion to the people who do this workshop

Author: yes but i thought that the workshop assumes that the person has basic knowledge in java. and since this part is a bit of looping, explaining it would become a bit vague. should I still try to explain it more?

Reviewer: yep, u atleast need to explain what we are trying to do with that code and what's happening

Reviewer: @hackyguru ^

        }
      }
    }
  }
  ```
  

> Next, we need to define a function called mousePressed(). This function colors the selected tile with the selected color from the color palette.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we need to define a function called `mousePressed()`. This function colors the selected tile with the selected color from the color palette.
```

      grid[a][b] = new Tile(a, b, color(100));
  }
}

void draw()
{ 
  for (int a = 0; a < grid.length; ++a)
  {
    for (int b = 0; b < grid[a].length; ++b)
      grid[b][a].Display();
  }
  
  if (show)
  {
    for (int a = 0; a < colours.length; ++a)
    {
      fill(colours[a]);
      stroke(0);
      ellipse(50, (a * 50) + 50, 30, 30);
    }
  }
  

  // Function for painting with mouse press
  if (mousePressed && mouseButton == LEFT)
  {
    for (int a = 0; a < grid.length; ++a)
    {
      for (int b = 0; b < grid[a].length; ++b)
      {
        if (mouseX >= (b * 20) && mouseX <= 20 + (b * 20) && mouseY >= (a * 20) && mouseY <= 20 + (a * 20))
        {
          if (show)
          {
            for (int c = 0; c < colours.length; ++c)
            {
              if (dist(mouseX, mouseY, 50, (c * 50) + 50) <= 30)
                return;
            }
          }
          
          grid[b][a].colour = selected;
        }
      }
    }
  }

}
void mousePressed()
{
  if (show)
  {
    for (int a = 0; a < colours.length; ++a)
    {
      if (dist(mouseX, mouseY, 50, (a * 50) + 50) <= 30)
        selected = colours[a];
    }
  }
}
```

</details>

> And finally, the coding part for both HTML and Java is done!

Reviewer: Uhh, u said we are going to use processing.js file but i can't find any reference to it in the code or the final code.

Author: the processing.js library is used.. we've import the script in the html file... the java file has all the required functionality
